README.md, before:

# 🦞 CLAWDIS — WhatsApp & Telegram Gateway for AI Agents

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/whatsapp-clawd.jpg" alt="CLAWDIS" width="400">
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>EXFOLIATE! EXFOLIATE!</strong>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/steipete/clawdis/actions/workflows/ci.yml?branch=main"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/steipete/clawdis/ci.yml?branch=main&style=for-the-badge" alt="CI status"></a>
  <a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/clawdis"><img src="https://img.shields.io/npm/v/clawdis.svg?style=for-the-badge" alt="npm version"></a>
  <a href="LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-blue.svg?style=for-the-badge" alt="MIT License"></a>
</p>

**CLAWDIS** is a WhatsApp- and Telegram-to-AI gateway. Send a message, get an AI response. It's like having a genius lobster in your pocket 24/7.

```
┌─────────────┐      ┌──────────┐      ┌─────────────┐
│  WhatsApp   │ ───▶ │ CLAWDIS  │ ───▶ │  AI Agent   │
│  Telegram   │ ───▶ │  🦞⏱️💙   │ ◀─── │   (Pi/Tau)  │
│  (You)      │ ◀─── │          │      │             │
└─────────────┘      └──────────┘      └─────────────┘
```

## Why "CLAWDIS"?

**CLAWDIS** = CLAW + TARDIS

Because every space lobster needs a time-and-space machine. The Doctor has a TARDIS. [Clawd](https://clawd.me) has a CLAWDIS. Both are blue. Both are chaotic. Both are loved.

## Features

- 📱 **WhatsApp Integration** — Personal WhatsApp Web (Baileys)
- ✈️ **Telegram (Bot API)** — DMs and groups via grammY
- 🤖 **AI Agent Gateway** — Pi/Tau only (Pi CLI in RPC mode)
- 💬 **Session Management** — Per-sender conversation context
- 🔔 **Heartbeats** — Periodic check-ins for proactive AI
- 👥 **Group Chat Support** — Mention-based triggering
- 📎 **Media Support** — Images, audio, documents, voice notes
- 🎤 **Voice Transcription** — Whisper integration
- 🔧 **Tool Streaming** — Real-time display (💻📄✍️📝)
- 🖥️ **macOS Companion (Clawdis.app)** — Menu bar controls, on-device Voice Wake, model/config editor

Only the Pi/Tau CLI is supported now; legacy Claude/Codex/Gemini paths have been removed.

## Quick Start
Mac signing tip: set `SIGN_IDENTITY="Apple Development: Your Name (TEAMID)"` in your shell profile so `scripts/restart-mac.sh` signs with your cert (defaults to ad-hoc). Debug bundle ID remains `com.steipete.clawdis.debug`.

Runtime requirement: **Node ≥22.0.0** (not bundled). The macOS app and CLI both use the host runtime; install via Homebrew or official installers before running `clawdis`.

```bash
# Install
npm install -g clawdis

# Link your WhatsApp
clawdis login

# Send a message
clawdis send --to +1234567890 --message "Hello from the CLAWDIS!"

# Talk directly to the agent (no WhatsApp send)
clawdis agent --to +1234567890 --message "Ship checklist" --thinking high

# Start the gateway (WebSocket control plane)
clawdis gateway --port 18789 --verbose

# If the port is busy, force-kill listeners then start
clawdis gateway --force
```

## macOS Companion App (Clawdis.app)

- **On-device Voice Wake:** listens for wake words (e.g. “Claude”) using Apple’s on-device speech recognizer (macOS 26+). macOS still shows the standard Speech/Mic permissions prompt, but audio stays on device.
- **Push-to-talk (Right Option hold):** hold right Option to speak; the voice overlay shows live partials and sends when you release.
- **Config tab:** pick the model from your local Pi model catalog (`pi-mono/packages/ai/src/models.generated.ts`), or enter a custom model ID; edit session store path and context tokens.
- **Voice settings:** language + additional languages, mic picker, live level meter, trigger-word table, and a built-in test harness.
- **Menu bar toggle:** enable/disable Voice Wake from the menu bar; respects Dock-icon preference.

Build/run the mac app with `./scripts/restart-mac.sh` (packages, installs, and launches), or `swift build --package-path apps/macos && open dist/Clawdis.app`.

## Configuration

Create `~/.clawdis/clawdis.json`:

```json5
{
  inbound: {
    allowFrom: ["+1234567890"],
    reply: {
      mode: "command",
      command: ["tau", "--mode", "json", "{{BodyStripped}}"],
      session: {
        scope: "per-sender",
        idleMinutes: 1440
      },
      heartbeatMinutes: 10
    }
  }
}
```

## Documentation

- [Configuration Guide](./docs/configuration.md)
- [Agent Integration](./docs/agents.md)
- [Group Chats](./docs/group-messages.md)
- [Security](./docs/security.md)
- [Troubleshooting](./docs/troubleshooting.md)
- [The Lore](./docs/lore.md) 🦞
- [Telegram (Bot API)](./docs/telegram.md)

## Clawd

CLAWDIS was built for **Clawd**, a space lobster AI assistant. See the full setup in [`docs/clawd.md`](./docs/clawd.md).

- 🦞 **Clawd's Home:** [clawd.me](https://clawd.me)
- 📜 **Clawd's Soul:** [soul.md](https://soul.md)
- 👨‍💻 **Peter's Blog:** [steipete.me](https://steipete.me)
- 🐦 **Twitter:** [@steipete](https://twitter.com/steipete)

## Provider

### WhatsApp Web
```bash
clawdis login      # Scan QR code
clawdis gateway    # Start listening (WS on 127.0.0.1:18789)
```

### Telegram (Bot API)
Bot-mode support (grammY only) shares the same `main` session as WhatsApp/WebChat, with groups kept isolated. Text and media send work via `clawdis send --provider telegram`. The unified `clawdis gateway` starts WhatsApp and, when `TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN` or `telegram.botToken` is set, Telegram too (use `--provider` to force web|telegram|all). Webhook mode: `--webhook --port … --webhook-secret … --webhook-url …` (or register via BotFather). See `docs/telegram.md` for setup and limits.

## Commands

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `clawdis login` | Link WhatsApp Web via QR |
| `clawdis send` | Send a message (WhatsApp default; `--provider telegram` for bot mode). Always uses the Gateway WS; requires a running gateway. |
| `clawdis agent` | Talk directly to the agent (no WhatsApp send) |
| `clawdis gateway` | Start the Gateway server (WS control plane). Params: `--port`, `--token`, `--force`, `--verbose`. |
| `clawdis gateway health|status|send|agent|call` | Gateway WS clients; assume a running gateway. |
| `clawdis status` | Web session health + session store summary |
| `clawdis health` | Reports cached provider state from the running gateway. |
| `clawdis heartbeat` | Trigger a heartbeat |

#### Gateway client params (WS only)
- `--url` (default `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`)
- `--token` (shared secret if set on the gateway)
- `--timeout <ms>` (WS call timeout)

#### Send
- `--provider whatsapp|telegram` (default whatsapp)
- `--media <path-or-url>`
- `--json` for machine-readable output

#### Health
- Reads gateway/provider state (no direct Baileys socket from the CLI).

In chat, send `/status` to see if the agent is reachable, how much context the session has used, and the current thinking/verbose toggles—no agent call required.
`/status` also shows whether your WhatsApp web session is linked and how long ago the creds were refreshed so you know when to re-scan the QR.

### Sessions, surfaces, and WebChat

- Direct chats now share a canonical session key `main` by default (configurable via `inbound.reply.session.mainKey`). Groups stay isolated as `group:<jid>`.
- WebChat always attaches to the `main` session and hydrates the full Tau history from `~/.clawdis/sessions/<SessionId>.jsonl`, so desktop view mirrors WhatsApp/Telegram turns.
- Inbound contexts carry a `Surface` hint (e.g., `whatsapp`, `webchat`, `telegram`) for logging; replies still go back to the originating surface deterministically.
- Every inbound message is wrapped for the agent as `[Surface FROM HOST/IP TIMESTAMP] body`:
  - WhatsApp: `[WhatsApp +15551234567 2025-12-09 12:34] …`
- Telegram: `[Telegram Ada Lovelace (@ada_bot) id:123456789 2025-12-09 12:34] …`
  - WebChat: `[WebChat my-mac.local 10.0.0.5 2025-12-09 12:34] …`
  This keeps the model aware of the transport, sender, host, and time without relying on implicit context.

## Credits

- **Peter Steinberger** ([@steipete](https://twitter.com/steipete)) — Creator
- **Mario Zechner** ([@badlogicgames](https://twitter.com/badlogicgames)) — Tau/Pi, security testing
- **Clawd** 🦞 — The space lobster who demanded a better name

## License

MIT — Free as a lobster in the ocean.

---

*"We're all just playing with our own prompts."*

🦞💙

Commit message:

docs: clarify voice wake last-channel routing

README.md, after:

# 🦞 CLAWDIS — WhatsApp & Telegram Gateway for AI Agents

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/whatsapp-clawd.jpg" alt="CLAWDIS" width="400">
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>EXFOLIATE! EXFOLIATE!</strong>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/steipete/clawdis/actions/workflows/ci.yml?branch=main"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/steipete/clawdis/ci.yml?branch=main&style=for-the-badge" alt="CI status"></a>
  <a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/clawdis"><img src="https://img.shields.io/npm/v/clawdis.svg?style=for-the-badge" alt="npm version"></a>
  <a href="LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-blue.svg?style=for-the-badge" alt="MIT License"></a>
</p>

**CLAWDIS** is a WhatsApp- and Telegram-to-AI gateway. Send a message, get an AI response. It's like having a genius lobster in your pocket 24/7.

```
┌─────────────┐      ┌──────────┐      ┌─────────────┐
│  WhatsApp   │ ───▶ │ CLAWDIS  │ ───▶ │  AI Agent   │
│  Telegram   │ ───▶ │  🦞⏱️💙   │ ◀─── │   (Pi/Tau)  │
│  (You)      │ ◀─── │          │      │             │
└─────────────┘      └──────────┘      └─────────────┘
```

## Why "CLAWDIS"?

**CLAWDIS** = CLAW + TARDIS

Because every space lobster needs a time-and-space machine. The Doctor has a TARDIS. [Clawd](https://clawd.me) has a CLAWDIS. Both are blue. Both are chaotic. Both are loved.

## Features

- 📱 **WhatsApp Integration** — Personal WhatsApp Web (Baileys)
- ✈️ **Telegram (Bot API)** — DMs and groups via grammY
- 🤖 **AI Agent Gateway** — Pi/Tau only (Pi CLI in RPC mode)
- 💬 **Session Management** — Per-sender conversation context
- 🔔 **Heartbeats** — Periodic check-ins for proactive AI
- 👥 **Group Chat Support** — Mention-based triggering
- 📎 **Media Support** — Images, audio, documents, voice notes
- 🎤 **Voice Transcription** — Whisper integration
- 🔧 **Tool Streaming** — Real-time display (💻📄✍️📝)
- 🖥️ **macOS Companion (Clawdis.app)** — Menu bar controls, on-device Voice Wake, model/config editor

Only the Pi/Tau CLI is supported now; legacy Claude/Codex/Gemini paths have been removed.

## Quick Start
Mac signing tip: set `SIGN_IDENTITY="Apple Development: Your Name (TEAMID)"` in your shell profile so `scripts/restart-mac.sh` signs with your cert (defaults to ad-hoc). Debug bundle ID remains `com.steipete.clawdis.debug`.

Runtime requirement: **Node ≥22.0.0** (not bundled). The macOS app and CLI both use the host runtime; install via Homebrew or official installers before running `clawdis`.

```bash
# Install
npm install -g clawdis

# Link your WhatsApp
clawdis login

# Send a message
clawdis send --to +1234567890 --message "Hello from the CLAWDIS!"

# Talk directly to the agent (no WhatsApp send)
clawdis agent --to +1234567890 --message "Ship checklist" --thinking high

# Start the gateway (WebSocket control plane)
clawdis gateway --port 18789 --verbose

# If the port is busy, force-kill listeners then start
clawdis gateway --force
```

## macOS Companion App (Clawdis.app)

- **On-device Voice Wake:** listens for wake words (e.g. “Claude”) using Apple’s on-device speech recognizer (macOS 26+). macOS still shows the standard Speech/Mic permissions prompt, but audio stays on device. Replies are delivered to the **last-used main surface** (WhatsApp/Telegram/WebChat); if delivery fails, you can still inspect the run in WebChat/logs.
- **Push-to-talk (Right Option hold):** hold right Option to speak; the voice overlay shows live partials and sends when you release.
- **Config tab:** pick the model from your local Pi model catalog (`pi-mono/packages/ai/src/models.generated.ts`), or enter a custom model ID; edit session store path and context tokens.
- **Voice settings:** language + additional languages, mic picker, live level meter, trigger-word table, and a built-in test harness.
- **Menu bar toggle:** enable/disable Voice Wake from the menu bar; respects Dock-icon preference.

Build/run the mac app with `./scripts/restart-mac.sh` (packages, installs, and launches), or `swift build --package-path apps/macos && open dist/Clawdis.app`.

## Configuration

Create `~/.clawdis/clawdis.json`:

```json5
{
  inbound: {
    allowFrom: ["+1234567890"],
    reply: {
      mode: "command",
      command: ["tau", "--mode", "json", "{{BodyStripped}}"],
      session: {
        scope: "per-sender",
        idleMinutes: 1440
      },
      heartbeatMinutes: 10
    }
  }
}
```

## Documentation

- [Configuration Guide](./docs/configuration.md)
- [Agent Integration](./docs/agents.md)
- [Group Chats](./docs/group-messages.md)
- [Security](./docs/security.md)
- [Troubleshooting](./docs/troubleshooting.md)
- [The Lore](./docs/lore.md) 🦞
- [Telegram (Bot API)](./docs/telegram.md)

## Clawd

CLAWDIS was built for **Clawd**, a space lobster AI assistant. See the full setup in [`docs/clawd.md`](./docs/clawd.md).

- 🦞 **Clawd's Home:** [clawd.me](https://clawd.me)
- 📜 **Clawd's Soul:** [soul.md](https://soul.md)
- 👨‍💻 **Peter's Blog:** [steipete.me](https://steipete.me)
- 🐦 **Twitter:** [@steipete](https://twitter.com/steipete)

## Provider

### WhatsApp Web
```bash
clawdis login      # Scan QR code
clawdis gateway    # Start listening (WS on 127.0.0.1:18789)
```

### Telegram (Bot API)
Bot-mode support (grammY only) shares the same `main` session as WhatsApp/WebChat, with groups kept isolated. Text and media send work via `clawdis send --provider telegram`. The unified `clawdis gateway` starts WhatsApp and, when `TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN` or `telegram.botToken` is set, Telegram too (use `--provider` to force web|telegram|all). Webhook mode: `--webhook --port … --webhook-secret … --webhook-url …` (or register via BotFather). See `docs/telegram.md` for setup and limits.

## Commands

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `clawdis login` | Link WhatsApp Web via QR |
| `clawdis send` | Send a message (WhatsApp default; `--provider telegram` for bot mode). Always uses the Gateway WS; requires a running gateway. |
| `clawdis agent` | Talk directly to the agent (no WhatsApp send) |
| `clawdis gateway` | Start the Gateway server (WS control plane). Params: `--port`, `--token`, `--force`, `--verbose`. |
| `clawdis gateway health|status|send|agent|call` | Gateway WS clients; assume a running gateway. |
| `clawdis status` | Web session health + session store summary |
| `clawdis health` | Reports cached provider state from the running gateway. |
| `clawdis heartbeat` | Trigger a heartbeat |

#### Gateway client params (WS only)
- `--url` (default `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`)
- `--token` (shared secret if set on the gateway)
- `--timeout <ms>` (WS call timeout)

#### Send
- `--provider whatsapp|telegram` (default whatsapp)
- `--media <path-or-url>`
- `--json` for machine-readable output

#### Health
- Reads gateway/provider state (no direct Baileys socket from the CLI).

In chat, send `/status` to see if the agent is reachable, how much context the session has used, and the current thinking/verbose toggles—no agent call required.
`/status` also shows whether your WhatsApp web session is linked and how long ago the creds were refreshed so you know when to re-scan the QR.

### Sessions, surfaces, and WebChat

- Direct chats now share a canonical session key `main` by default (configurable via `inbound.reply.session.mainKey`). Groups stay isolated as `group:<jid>`.
- WebChat always attaches to the `main` session and hydrates the full Tau history from `~/.clawdis/sessions/<SessionId>.jsonl`, so desktop view mirrors WhatsApp/Telegram turns.
- Inbound contexts carry a `Surface` hint (e.g., `whatsapp`, `webchat`, `telegram`) for logging; replies still go back to the originating surface deterministically.
- Every inbound message is wrapped for the agent as `[Surface FROM HOST/IP TIMESTAMP] body`:
  - WhatsApp: `[WhatsApp +15551234567 2025-12-09 12:34] …`
- Telegram: `[Telegram Ada Lovelace (@ada_bot) id:123456789 2025-12-09 12:34] …`
  - WebChat: `[WebChat my-mac.local 10.0.0.5 2025-12-09 12:34] …`
  This keeps the model aware of the transport, sender, host, and time without relying on implicit context.

## Credits

- **Peter Steinberger** ([@steipete](https://twitter.com/steipete)) — Creator
- **Mario Zechner** ([@badlogicgames](https://twitter.com/badlogicgames)) — Tau/Pi, security testing
- **Clawd** 🦞 — The space lobster who demanded a better name

## License

MIT — Free as a lobster in the ocean.

---

*"We're all just playing with our own prompts."*

🦞💙
